Major avionic systems generally comprise a number of smaller sub-systems whichare combined to form an overall system. The combination, interconnection and con-
trol of the individual sub-systems so that the overall system can carry out its tasks
effectively is referred to as ‘systems integration’. The number of sub-systems which
need to be integrated to form a major system can be appreciated from the previous
chapter on flight management systems.
It is instructive to review the development of avionic systems and their integration
into overall systems in the light of the technology available and the circumstances
prevailing at the time. The object is to put the development of today’s advanced
systems and the even more advanced systems currently under development in per-
spective. In many cases the current concepts and philosophy are not new – often the
originators of particular system developments in the past were far sighted in their
concepts, but, as always, were limited by the technology available at the time.
World War 2 (WW2) resulted in a major growth in the electronic equipment
installed in aircraft and the birth of avionics, with the very rapid development of
airborne radar systems and associated displays, radar warning systems and ECM,
and more advanced autopilot systems exploiting electronics. Installation of the elec-
tronic equipment (or ‘black boxes’), however, was very much on an ad hoc basis due
to the very rapid developments and time scale pressures in war time. Some very lim-
ited degree of integration between sub-systems was introduced, for example coup-
ling the bomb sight to the autopilot – as readers who have seen the film ‘Memphis
Belle’ may have noted. In general, however, the systems were ‘stand alone’ sys-
tems and their integration into an overall system was carried out by specific crew
members such as the navigator, bomb aimer or radar operator.
The 1950s period saw the emergence of a number of avionic sub-systems (some
of which were initiated during WW2) which have since undergone continual devel-
opment and now form part of the avionic equipment suite of most civil and military
jet aircraft and helicopters. For example, auto-stabilisers (or stability augmentation
