2.2.2 Basic Principles
The basic configuration of a HUD is shown schematically in Figure 2.4. The pilot views the outside world through the HUD combiner glass (and windscreen). The combiner glass is effectively a ‘see through’ mirror with a high optical transmission efficiency so that there is little loss of visibility looking through the combiner and windscreen. It is called a combiner as it optically combines the collimated display symbology with the outside world scene viewed through it. Referring to Figure 2.4, the display symbology generated from the aircraft sensors and systems (such as the INS and air data system) is displayed on the surface of a cathode ray tube (CRT).

The display images are then relayed through a relay lens system which magnifies the display and corrects for some of the optical errors which are otherwise present in the system. The relayed display images are then reflected through an angle of near 90 by the fold mirror and thence to the collimating lens which collimates the display images which are then reflected from the combiner glass into the pilot’s forward field of view. The virtual images of the display symbology appear to the pilot to be at infinity and overlay the distant world scene, as they are collimated. The function of the fold mirror is to enable a compact optical configuration to be achieved so that the HUD occupies the minimum possible space in the cockpit.

The fundamental importance of collimation to any HUD system merits further explanation for the benefit of readers whose knowledge of optics needs refreshing. A collimator is defined as an optical system of finite focal length with an image source at the focal plane. Rays of light emanating from a particular point on the focal plane exit from the collimating system as a parallel bunch of rays, as if they came from a source at infinity. Figures 2.5(a) and (b) show a simple collimating lens system with the rays traced from a source at the centre, O, and a point, D, on the focal plane respectively. A ray from a point on the focal plane which goes through the centre of the lens is not refracted and is referred to as the ‘non-deviated ray’. The other rays emanating from the point are all parallel to the non-deviated ray after exiting the collimator.

It should be noted that the collimating lens, in practice, would be made of several elements to minimise the unacceptable shortcomings of a single element.

It can be seen from Figure 2.5(a) that an observer looking parallel to the optical axis will see point O at eye positions A, B and C, and the angle of gaze to view O is independent of the displacement of the eye from the optical axis. Similarly, it can be seen from Figure 2.5(b) that the angle of gaze from the observer to see point D is the same for eye positions A, B and C and is independent of translation.

The refractive HUD optical system, in fact, is basically similar to the simple optical collimation system shown in Figure 2.6. The rays are traced for the observer to see points D, O and E on the display with eye positions at points A, B and C. It can be seen that the angles of gaze to see points D, O and E are the same from points A, B or C. The appearance of the collimated display is thus independent of the position (or translation) of the eye and is only dependent on the angle of gaze. Also because of collimation, the display appears to be at infinity as the rays emanating from any point on the display are all parallel after exiting the collimating system.

It should be noted that the display images must be correctly collimated. Decollimation is the term used when the light from a given point on the display does not leave the optical system parallel over the entire lens surface. The light can converge, diverge or otherwise ‘misbehave’ resulting in ‘swimming’ of the display images when the pilot’s head moves. Sometimes this creates discomfort and in the case of convergence can even cause nausea.

A very important parameter with any HUD is the field of view (FOV), which should be as large as possible within the severe space constraints imposed by the cockpit geometry. A large horizontal FOV is particularly important to enable the pilot to ‘look into turns’ when the HUD forms part of a night vision system and the only visibility the pilot has of the outside world is the FLIR image displayed on the HUD.

It is important to distinguish between the instantaneous field of view (IFOV) and the total field of view (TFOV) of a HUD as the two are not the same in the case of the refractive type of HUD.

The instantaneous field of view is the angular coverage of the imagery which can be seen by the observer at any specific instant and is shown in the simplified diagram in Figure 2.7(a). It is determined by the diameter of the collimating lens, D, and the distance, L, of the observer’s eyes from the collimating lens.

